Getting some motivation
=======================

Why should I care about computing and coding?
---------------------------------------------

Computers can be powerful allies. The are ideal for automating repetitive tasks.
Furthermore, they can perform calculations and analysis that would be infeasible
for the human brain alone.

These days many parts of the biological sciences are become more and more data
driven. Technological advancements have lead to a huge increase in the
generation of biological data. Data analysis is required to extract biological
insights from this data. To a large extent the rate limiting factor in
generating biological insight is the lack of appropriate data analysis tools.

However, as an experimental biologist you may prefer to work in the lab over
sitting in front of the computer. You may even ask yourself if learning to
program has any benefit to you whatsoever.

Similar to learning a new language there are several benefits to learning
computer programming. Importantly it gives you a new perspective. In fact
professional programmers are encouraged to learn a new programming language
every year to allow them to experience new problem solving techniques.

More concretely, learning to program will help you get a better understanding
of data analysis. It may even expand your mind to allow you to see new
possibilities available to you.

Also by getting more familiar with computing your interactions with programmers
and data analysis folk will improve. So even if you never end up writing a
script by yourself learning to code will help you express your ideas to people
that enjoy programming.


What you can expect to learn here
---------------------------------

Many books on computing assume that the reader has a basic knowledge of how a
computer operates and associated jargon. This booklet attempts not to make any
such assumptions and important concepts are explained in
:doc:`how-to-think-like-a-computer`. Furthermore, important terms and their
background are explained throughout in attempt to demystify some of the jargon
used in computing. This should stand you in good stead when faced with more
advanced material on computing.

Use of the command line is required for many bioinformatics tools and access to
high-performance computing clusters. The essence of the Unix command line, used
in both Linux and Macs, is introduced in :doc:`first-steps-towards-automation`.
After which the command line is used persistently to interact with a variety of
useful programs. At the end you should feel comfortable using the command line
to interact with your computer and to automate tasks.
